
Usability
=========

The website should be easy to navigate irrespective of the type of user.  It
should have an appealing user interface which is pleasant to the eyes.  A
through consideration should be given for its aesthetic design in order to make
it easily navigable and to have a good readability. The key focus should be on
making the user interface as interactive as possible.

Performance
===========

In order to have a great performance, the website should be as lightweight as
possible by keeping minimum hardware demands. For it to be efficient, any task
initiated by the user should be completed in a timely manner.  The web server
should be able to serve multiple requests and when a large number of users are
logged in.

Reliability
===========

In case of Internet failure, the user's portfolios should be brought back to a
consistent state when user logs in the system again after the failed internet
connection. The system should keep a backup of user's data in case of server
failure. A proper care should be taken to handle a situation where a particular
stock source is not available (i.e. Yahoo).

Security
========

The system should be secure enough such that user's privacy is maintained.  The
system should have a login process irrespective of the application i.e via
Website, Mobile or Twitter interface.

Supportability/Extensibility
============================

It should be feasible to extend any server components and include improved
versions of modules which can be installed only by administrators. For future
purposes of handling the load, it should be easier to include more number of
servers to achieve load balancing. The system should be platform independent so
that it is easy to move to newer technologies or the next versions of web
server.

Maintainability
===============

The system should be easy to maintain for the administrator. The administrator
should be provided with an interface to interact with the entire system to make
changes and to recover from any failure manually as well. The interface should
give the administrator enough capability to perform future maintenance.

Testability
===========

The system should be flexible enough to allow creating test databases and fake
players so that feature test does not need to manipulate the actual database.
This would ensure that it has great testability which can be used to build a
more robust

Consistency
===========

It should be ensured that the application is consistent throughout irrespective
of what interface the player is using i.e whether website, mobile application
or Twitter interface. Functionality might be limited on these different
interfaces but it should not difficult for the user to shift from one
application to another to access the system. Buzz words used should be same
throughout and on all the interfaces to avoid confusion.

Documentation
=============

The website should have enough material in the form of tutorial which can help
the user to understand the rules and policies of the Stock fantasy league game
and how it works.

